So let's go ahead and do the add first.
So we're gonna say if, This.
Or we'll say if value is
less than this dot value,
Then we're gonna ask if
I have a left child.
So if this dot left,
Then we're gonna call this dot
left dot add with value and
recursively go down the tree here.
Else, This dot left
equals new node, Value.
Then here we need to adjust
the heights a little bit.
So we're gonna say if no this dot right.
Or this dot right dot height,
Is less than this dot left,
Dot height, Then we just need to make
sure that say this dot height equals
this dot left dot height plus one.
So if we're modifying
the height here as we're going,
we wanna just make sure that
we're updating it as we go.
And we're gonna have the mere logic in
the else but just for the other side.
So this is go left.
And this is go right.
So we're gonna say if this dot right,
we're gonna say this dot
right dot add value.
Else this dot right equals
new node with value.
And same logic here.
If this dot left, Or
this dot right dot height is greater
than this dot left dot height.
Then we just wanna make
sure that we say this dot
height equals this dot
right dot height plus one.
So that's all of the add right there.
As you can see here it looks.
This is basically just a BST add done
recursively with the addition of we're
worrying about adding heights at the end.
Otherwise this is exactly
the same as the idea of adding
an add to a BST recursively.
With the only difference being here
that we call balance down here.
Okay?
I'm just gonna delete all this.
So the first thing we're
gonna do in balance is say
const right height is
assigned this dot right.
If we have one,
then this dot right dot height.
Otherwise it's zero const left height is
assigned this dot left if we have one.
It's gonna be this dot left dot height,
Or zero.
So we're gonna say if left height is
greater than right height plus one.
Meaning that there are two different,
right?
There we're gonna say const.
This is the part where we need to check
if we need to do a double rotation.
So, bear with me for a second.
We're gonna say const left right height
is assigned this dot left dot right.
If that exists, then we're gonna say this
dot left dot right dot height or zero.
Same thing here for left,
left, height const.
Left, left, height is assigned.
This dot left dot left.
And if that exists, then we say
you could also do a what is it?
Nullish selectors I think
that's what they're called.
No, I'm thinking the wrong thing.
Where you just say,
question mark like this.
Can't remember the name of that feature,
anyway.
>> I believe it's called
[INAUDIBLE] stuff like that.
>> Null coalescing, that sounds right.
I believe you [LAUGH].
But I don't think that's enabled in
Code Sandbox right now by default.
So we're just gonna do it this way.
Dot left dot height or zero.
Now we can check if
this is basically bent.
If it's bent,
then we're gonna do a rotation.
So what we need to say here is if,
Left right height is greater
than left left height,
then we do this dot left dot rotate RR.
So this is a double rotation here.
If it's not,
then we just skip that part and
we just say this dot rotate LL.
So if we need to double rotation on the
left child we'll rotate to the right or
from the right.
And otherwise, and no matter what,
if we're inside of this block,
we're always going to rotate
LL on the node itself.
Here we're gonna say else if, Right
height is greater than
left height plus one.
Then we need to do a rotation.
And same thing here, const right
right height is equal to this dot right,
Dot right this dot right dot height,
Or zero.
Then const right left height is
assigned this dot right dot left.
We'll say this dot right dot
left dot height, Or zero.
Then if, Right left height,
Is greater than right right height.
Then we're gonna say this
dot right dot rotate LL.
And then this dot rotate RR.
This is a double rotation.
So this is the all of the logic for
balancing that we run on on the node.
Now we just need to go
program these two functions.
Rotate LL and rotate RR.
But the nice thing notice again,
this logic and this logic,
it's the same function, right?
Still works the same way.
Which is nice, we don't have to code
four different ways of doing rotations.
It's just two ways of doing rotations and
sometimes we do it twice.
All right, this is gonna be fun,
let's do rotate RR first.
So we're gonna say const value
before is assigned this dot value.
Const left before is
assigned this dot left.
This dot value is assigned
this dot right dot value.
This dot left, Is assigned this dot right.
This dot right is assigned
this dot right dot right.
If you're looking at this thing
like how do I know how to do this?
I looked it up [LAUGH].
I can't remember this from memory.
This dot left, Dot right.
Well that's nice for the sandbox.
There we go.
This dot left is assigned this dot right,
this dot right is assigned
this dot right dot right,
this dot left dot right is
assigned this dot left dot left.
This dot left dot left
is assigned left before.
This dot left dot value
is assigned value before.
This dot left dot update in new location.
This dot update in new location
which I already had down there.
Make sure I got that right, this top left.
So I actually had these backwards.
I did, sorry about that.
Cool.
So that is a right rotation.
And now the nice thing,
that left rotation is just the exact
mere opposite of what we did there.
So const value before is
assigned this dot value.
Const right before is
assigned this dot right.
This dot value is assigned this dot value.
Sorry, this dot left dot value,
left dot value.
This dot right is assigned this dot left.
This dot left is assigned
this dot left dot left.
This dot right dot left is
assigned this dot right dot right.
This dot right dot right
is equal to right before.
This dot right dot value
equals value before.
And then this dot right dot update new
location and this dot update new location.
Cool, so those are the two rotations.
Now we're just gonna do the update
new location and then we are golden.
So if this dot right, And
this dot left meaning there
are no children for this.
Then this dot height is equal to one.
Else if, This dot right.
Or, This dot left and
this dot right dot height,
Is less than this dot left dot height.
So again, if I don't have a right child or
I do have a left child.
And the right height is less
than the left height which
means that we need to take
the height from the left.
Yep, then we're gonna
say this dot height is
assigned this dot left
dot height plus one.
Because we rotated it and
now the height needs to be adjusted to
whatever the left height's rotation is.
So the left's height plus one is right
because it's the parent of the child.
Else, otherwise we can just
say this dot height is
assigned this dot right
dot height plus one.
So basically what we're saying,
if this is a leaf node aka has
no children its height is one.
If the left child has the greater height,
then use its height and add one.
Otherwise use the right child and
add one to its height.
Right, because the height is always gonna
be one more than one of its children.
That was a little bit of code [LAUGH].
Hopefully you stuck with me.
Let's see if our AVL tree
actually passes unit tests.
Let's click play.
AVL test is now passing.
Cool, I was very afraid it
wasn't going to [LAUGH].
So I'll take questions
here in just a second.
But I wanna show you because I
think this is the coolest part.
We're gonna copy and
paste this tree into our tree visualizer.
Save it, I'm gonna pop over to our
browser and look at our tree visualizer.
Look how flat this tree is.
How cool is that, right?
It's super flat.
So we have max depth of 12.
And how many things are we
adding to it right now?
950 items in the array, or
sorry that we're adding all at once.
That's unbelievable.
So that means despite the fact that
we have 950 things in our tree,
at most, we have 12 hops.
So that means we can
find data really quickly.
So let's take a look at this as well.
Now you can see,
if we're adding 100 things, And
we're adding them in order,
This makes a very flat tree.
So we kind of do away with that problem
that we had before where it's super bent.
Or sorry, not super bent,
but it's super straight.
So that's pretty cool too.
I'm just gonna add 9,500 here,
see what happens.
It's probably gonna take a second.
So I went from 950 to
9,500 items in my tree.
And now at most I have 16 hops to
find the item I'm looking for.
Again, I think that's really cool.
Maybe I just have a warped
sense of what's cool [LAUGH].